# Review and Approval WG kickoff - October 8, 2020


## Attendees:



*   John Mertic
*   Luis Villanueva (DreamWorks)
*   Sean Wallitsch (DreamWorks)
*   Mark Jackels (DreamWorks)
*   Michael Kessler (Epic Games)
*   Kevin O’Neal (Autodesk / Shotgun)
*   Henry Vera(Dneg)
*   Erik Strauss (Netflix)
*   Darby Johnston(DJV)
*   Larry Gritz (Sony Pictures Imageworks)
*   Cottalango Leon (Sony Pictures Imageworks)
*   Alex Wilkie (Animal Logic)
*   Joshua Minor (OpenTimelineIO)
*   Balroop Johal (Animal Logic)
*   Chris Hall (AMD)
*   Bruno Sargeant (Unity)
*   Kevin Wheatley (Framestore)
*   Kimball Thurston (Weta Digital)


## Agenda:

- Welcome/Intros

- Discuss purpose of this working group and background

- Select WG leader(s)

- Align on proposal ( template at[ https://github.com/AcademySoftwareFoundation/tac/blob/master/process/wg_readme_template.md](https://github.com/AcademySoftwareFoundation/tac/blob/master/process/wg_readme_template.md) )

- Next steps and meeting cadence.


## Meeting Notes:

Thank you Luis!



*   Based on surveys/discussions on the challenges studios face is the need for standardization, simplification, and improved integration into review systems.
*   There are commercial solutions, but are looking more to create an overall framework for how to tackle this.
*   Challenges include:
    *   Need for improved performance
    *   Different players for different needs (e.g. flp book players, 
    *   Need to support per facility (even user) customization (e.g. hot keys)
*   Should define what we expect to get out of this working group -- should setup clear expectations.
    *   Wide representation to from chip makers to VFX houses
    *   What are we going to do and what are we not gonna do?
*   Erik Straus + Bruno Sargeant will be leading the group, subject to availability.
    *   Kimball Thurston is the TAC sponsor
*   Media Review has been one of the topics that has come up time and time again during ASWF foundation discussions and surveys
*   This gained renewed interest due to the WFH reality brought upon from COVID; there was dissatisfaction about existing solutions
*   Mission for this group isn’t too figure it all out, but rather to reduce/clarify the scope of this problem
*   If we agree that this something worth collaborating on we should definitely move forward, but if not then this group may not be the right place
*   ES - should spend some time to define the space and clarify the complexity of the issue and what scope of influence actually is -- this will help the ASWF decide how to move forward
    *   The outcome of this group may be nothing, and the energy around this space may be better served focusing on other initiatives
*   Should identify a baseline that’s shared among all participants
*   <span style="text-decoration:underline;">What is review and approval?</span>
*   The challenges differ depending on use case
*   Lots of different
*   The ability to view media and gain approval - Luis
*   Should we limit ourselves to 2D media?
    *   Adding 3D review capability would be a great long term goal
        *   Many 3D objects can be turned into 2D spins
    *   Just defining 2D review capability is a big enough projecte
*   Multi-track video should definitely be included.
*   Approval as information that comes out of a review, what are we capturing
    *   Notes, annotations, etc?
*   What forum are these reviews taking place? (theaters, at desk, etc)
*   Should avoid getting into too much into the weeds; maybe we can start thinking of general inputs and outputs
*   Might be worth looking at SciTech talks around this topic as a starting point to help narrow the scope and also identify common approaches
*   DWA some documentation around this that might be worth sharing.
*   Should also get the user perspective in this group -- should try bringing some of our colleagues along for future sessions
*   Is there a position ASWF has in regard to this issue/space? What do we see the solution for this actually being? Open Source? Vendor.
*   Are there high level goals that should be considered?
    *   Many vendors have a variety of tools but can we make sure these tools interoperate with each other (similar to OTIO)
*   Even just defining the problem space, even if nothing else gets done, would be a big win
*   Feels like the feeling at large is that current set of open source and 3rd party solution are somehow lacking in this space
    *   Also, even if a studio/facility has a great solution the bigger question is whether it’s worth continuing to develop a separate application themselves or somehow become part of a larger community effort
    *   Is there an awesome player/solution out there that could be open sourced?
    *   Or is there the possibility to collaborate in some type of “next gen” solution?
*   We should consider the end users as well since they are a key part of the review/approval processes
*   <span style="text-decoration:underline;">Mission Statement [(template)](https://github.com/AcademySoftwareFoundation/tac/blob/master/process/wg_readme_template.md)</span>
*   
*   <span style="text-decoration:underline;">Goals:</span>
*   Helping to define what review and approval mean
*   Identify the ecosystem and its capabilities
    *   Not just a single tool, several tools come together to provide the necessary experience/functionality
*   Identify what are the contexts these reviews play out in
    *   Who are the consumers/personas involved?
*   Identify what are the challenges that users (studios, vendors, etc) are facing in this space

**NEXT STEPS:**



*   Erik to take an initial stab at defining the initial definition for review and approval
    *   Then as a group we can review/revise them
*   Should start building the persona/consumer list
*   Might be useful to have a companies who are willing to “pull back the curtain” and share how they are handling review and approvals
*   May also be helpful to compile a list of available review solutions
*   Still need to define the boundaries for this group
    *   This groups outcome may likely be a recommendation for the ASWF
*   SPI and Weta may be able to do a presentation of their systems
*   Should establish how the artifacts generated by this group will be handled -- need to figure out what companies are comfortable with
*   Meeting cadence should be every two weeks for now (everyone’s busy) though the exact time of the week is still up for discussion
